Richard Moss is a visionary thinker,
a teacher, and an author
on transformation and the art of conscious living.
More than 30 years ago,
he left the practice of medicine,
after a life-changing realization
that he needed to help others
realize their multi-dimensional nature.
This, he says, is the key to letting go
of our burden of negativity and suffering.
People aound the world have benefitted from his work,
where they learn holistically,
with their mind, body, and feelings.
Most of us, however, tend to live
split between two worlds of mind,
neither aware of the other.
(soothing music)
We're going to start off with the T.S. Eliot poem.
Could you please share that with us?
It's very important.
Yeah, in one of the four quartets,
he says, "wait without hope,
"for hope would be hope for the wrong thing,
"wait without love,
"for love would be love of the wrong thing.
"There is still hope and love and faith,
"but the faith is in the waiting."
Then he says, " wait without thought.
"You are not ready for thought.
"And then the darkness shall become the light,
"and the stillness, the dancing."
Well, I can see why you love this poem,
because you make this statement.
"We have a mind, but we're not ready for it."
And these two must be linked.
Yeah, they are.
The notion of waiting, the notion of
getting quiet enough to let,
I use the expression mud,
the mud of thoughts that disturb
our sense of self, thoughts about ourselves,
that are judgments of ourselves,
that make us inflated or depressed.
Thoughts about the world, others,
other people in particular
that poison us in the moment.
We have to wait.
We have to wait, we have to let that get quiet
because then, beneath that,
is a much deeper layer of consciousness
that is available to everybody.
It's not in service to our survival.
It's not in service to our righteousness.
Our winning arguments, our winning battles.
It's in service to being able to see ourselves as we are,
and to know, to connect to,
a much deeper level of wisdom within us.
An intuitive wisdom that's available to all of us,
but which gets drowned out
by the noise of thoughts that create guilt,
and regret, and nostalgia.
Thoughts about the future that frighten us
or give us a false sense of hope.
The mind, the ordinary mind, drowns out
this deeper process and the thought that we live
from our ordinary mind
is a thought that's purely about survival.
It's not really different than a plant.
A plant will turn to the light
because it wants light.
Any creature will turn to what nourishes it,
and turn away from what threatens it.
It will turn to pleasure,
and try to avoid discomfort.
And, ultimately, we have this enormous computer brain.
All it's in service to is pleasure and avoiding pain.
And that's not enough,
because six and a half billion people
pursuing their idea of fulfillment,
without any regard to connection
to the planet as a whole,
is leading us now into ecologic disaster.
Which is the opportunity of our time.
We're basically seeing a failing
of ordinary mind,
We have to learn to wait.
I don't mean by wait, be passive and not act.
I mean wait until we have reached
a state of deep connectedness inside of us.
That's what you mean when you say,
"we have a mind, but we're not ready for it,"
but, obviously, we need to be able to develop
and access these other aspects of mind.
And that's what your work is about.
Yes, I mean, it's my work,
it's been the work of the mystics and seers
for millenia, but the work--
every generation is born undeveloped.
Every generation.
We're all babies, then children,
and young adults.
And, with the mind that we inherit,
through our conditioning, through our families,
through our culture, through our education,
secular and religious education,
is a very superficial level of mind.
It's a mind driven by thought.
And it's a computer.
I mean, all you have to do
is have a thought that makes you important,
and you puff up in self-importance.
All you have to do is have a thought
that makes you judgmental of someone else, or angry,
and all the neurotransmitters
are running around inside of you,
and the cortisol, and your inner being
is poisoned with anger and resentment
and bitterness, these kinds of things.
It's a computer.
And it's a computer that can take you
through Harvard, and MIT, and Cal Tech,
and the Sur Vonne.
Without you actually connected
to this deeper-root mind,
this deeper awareness, which isn't a "me and I,"
it's not a Richard Moss,
it's not the name any of us use for ourselves.
It's not our religion.
It's not our nationality.
In it, that, we have to wait.
We have to let, we have to teach ourselves
how to become available to that intelligence,
And when we start to listen
to that intelligence, we have to start
risking the changes in our behavior
that take our deeper consciousness
and turn it into meaningful action.
Because that may mean our life
and our circumstances shift around it.
Once we start accessing greater truths
within the greater mind.
We have to change.
Yeah.
We see how--
And we're afraid of
letting go of what we, like you say,
have already developed for our satisfaction
and our survival.
You know, having our little nuts
in our little basket.
We don't want to let go.
Take something as simple as divorce.
Two people didn't just come together
because they were indifferent to each other.
They cared.
They may have been wildly in love.
Nature wants us to be wildly in love,
because wildly in love means
lots of intercourse, which means babies.
But it's not a conscious process.
Divorce, however, happens one thought at a time.
And you won't get divorced
after one thought.
But after 100,000 thoughts,
"he doesn't listen to me,"
"he's too busy with his work,"
"he's looking at other people,"
"she doesn't really care about what's important to me,"
and on and on.
One thought after another.
And, in the moment of that thought,
a body, mind polluted with unhappiness,
anger, resentment, jealousy, envy.
And that's so unconscious.
We think that's a conscious life?
It's a fast asleep life.
So, if you start to just look at
what you do in a relationship,
you get to see the inability
to let that deeper wisdom grow love
in your world and in your life,
and we keep believing the problem is the other person.
We don't realize, the problem is
the thought I have about the other person.
We think the problem is how the other person is,
but the problem is our judgment of the other person.
Now, if I say to myself, "I am aware that I am judging you,
"I'm aware that that is making me angry,
"I wonder what would happen
"if I got really, really quiet, deeply quiet,
"if I wait without thought,
"because I'm not ready for thought,
"I wait without these judgments,
"because these judgments are poisoning me,
"and they poison people everywhere."
Six and a half billion human beings,
I'm talking about what every human being does,
except those that have awakened
and worked very hard
to stop listening to their thoughts.
But, if you get quiet,
if I get quiet with my wife,
and I start to--
and the mud of my anger, or my resentment,
or my self-importance, self-righteousness settles,
suddenly, I can all of the sudden see her,
see her circumstances, see what she cares about,
see what she values.
And then, quite spontaneously,
love flowers again.
But I have to wait without the love I remember.
I have to wait without hope that she's going to change,
which is the utter, ultimate arrogance,
the world should change
to make me feel better.
She should change.
He should change, so that I feel good.
The government should change.
Oh, by the way, everybody should start
being very ecological so that I feel better.
It's arrogance.
And yet, as you say, 6 billion plus people
engage in this every day.
And it's for some, for most,
maybe every moment of every day.
And it's what we call being human.
And, if that's all that we are as a human being,
then we are doomed.
We're simply doomed.
We are an incredibly intelligent
computer machine that will find some way
to make pleasure for itself,
even at the expense of others,
even at the expense of the air,
even at the expense of the water,
and the oceans, and the food quality.
But, that's not all who you are.
We also have, what people would call,
the holy soul, or the deeper self,
or the higher self.
But, in the most simple sense,
it's what's there in any person who gets quiet.
And now we have children
who don't feel safe in nature.
That have to have
the toys going fast, the media coming at them loud,
the boom box belting out sound.
We know that we're literally
seeing that children are losing the ability.
16 year olds have been losing it 1% a year
since they first started studying this in Germany,
and then in the U.S. in the late 70s and 80s.
We're losing the ability to differentiate color.
We're becoming more unconscious.
We're becoming more dull.
Computers, yes.
Yes, but we're only processing information
of immediate intensity,
without a sense of belonging or connection
to something more.
But that connection is there.
It's always there.
When a person suddenly has a shock,
like, a death, and everything stops.
Or they get notification
that they have a serious, perhaps, terminal illness.
Then, for people, there's an opportunity
for everything to stop.
And when all that rushing and busyness
and pursuing happiness
in a very superficial sense,
when all of that stops, suddenly,
wow, yes, maybe my body's dying
and I've just learned about it,
but what is this sense of peace
that's welling up inside of me?
Why do we have to wait for the crisis
to know the real bounty of life?
That's what I go around the world saying.
Don't wait for that.
But, it took almost no energy to create a mind
that thinks in terms of past, future,
me, my importance, my special-ness,
and you, who you are, who you aren't,
and how I judge you
that makes me angry or makes me hurt.
It took nothing.
By the time you're six years old, it's in place.
By the time you're 15 years old,
it's really, really got you, you know?
And the only training you did
was not a significant training.
I happened to have graduated medical school,
and I can tell you, it's easy.
Just a basic level of intelligence
and a certain amount of hours.
Now, there are some very bright people
who will get to the top level schools,
but it's still just simply training a computer.
You haven't necessarily--
Programming it.
Yep, you haven't taught the person how to truly think
rooted in a deeper connection.
So when you start to wake up,
when you have an awakening
to your essential self,
which is an experience that can be both,
it can be very easy, in a sense of
a gloriously rich, deep, profound, mystical connection.
Joy, bliss, peace that passeth understanding.
This also can be a very rough ride,
and I've written about this in my books,
how rough a ride this awakening
to this deeper consciousness can be.
But, the actual allowing
of your life to change.
The discipline to start living in the now,
in the present moment,
with a deeper awareness,
and returning to that connection,
is as hard work, or more difficult work,
than becoming a neurosurgeon.
Or, you know, people will say to me,
"well, what's the shortcut for peace?"
and I'll say, "would you ask Lance Armstrong
"for a shortcut to winning the Tour de France?"
Right.
The shortcut is, work.
And we don't know it in our culture.
We are an incredibly, incredibly indulgent, lazy society.
We want other--
you know, it is difficult to make decisions.
They're beginning to do research
on how actually difficult it is
to make decisions.
So, people make the same decision
over and over again, even if it's bad.
Even if it was good the first time.
The decision to withdraw as a child
may have been a good defense.
The decision to withdraw as an adult
is not a good decision.
The decision to rebel as a child
may have saved you and your family,
but the decision to continue being a rebel,
or becoming a grandiose know-it-all,
which is an adult's version of that, often,
is not a good decision.
So, we make the same decisions over and over again,
and because decisions are so difficult,
we let other people make decisions for us.
So, we're part of a business
that will create weapons that are heinous.
We're a part of a business
that sells foods loaded with trans fats.
And we, ourselves, may stop eating trans fats,
but we go to work at the same place
because it pays our bills.
We want politicians to make choices for us.
Isn't this an example of what happens
when you have a brain that's
smart enough to go to MIT and carry out
whatever its program is, but without the wisdom
of the mind you're talking about.
Without the wisdom of a deeper mind,
that deeper awareness.
Yes, to me, it's the (stammers) cosmic joke.
How could we be so smart
and be so stupid?
How smart are people like Alan Greenspan,
that could allow such economic stupidity to happen?
How smart are these people that run
these multibillion dollar financial--
Bear Stearns just collapsed, right?
Right.
I mean, these people are supposedly smart,
the brightest of the bright.
You want to know how bright they are?
They are the brightest of the bright,
but they're like a horse with blinkers on.
They're walking along like this,
and they're super bright,
but they're looking at one- one millionth of the picture.
It's the notion of, they have the focus of an eagle,
but they don't have the spacious,
vast, view of the terrain that the eagle has.
They think of themselves as eagles,
soaring above the society,
worth millions a year for their intelligence,
and they don't have a view of the world
in its integrity, a view of connectedness,
a view of belonging, because they wouldn't choose
to act the way they do
in service to their own organizations
if they had a spacious mind.
They have a focused mind, a trained mind.
A narrow mind.
And they're rewarded for it!
They get wealthy.
They have the best of the best.
They can stay on task.
And some of them are wonderful people.
You can be successful and have a spiritual awareness,
but most of them don't have
a deep spiritual awareness.
What they have is a kind of religious,
and it's almost a contradiction in their lives,
they're religious over here,
and then they're ruthlessly focused over here,
and the two worlds don't meet.
Because, religion itself, is, again, training,
as opposed to true, deep intelligence.
And what kind of damage does that do?
To have that kind of split
in one's own psyche?
Show up for church or synagogue on the weekends
and then you go into a ruthless
or materialistic endeavor all week long
and focus all of your intention and energy there?
What does that do to our mind?
I think that's a form of safety, believe it or not.
I compartmentalize myself so that I can say
I'm special, because I'm a good Christian,
or I'm a good Jew, or I'm a good Muslim,
and look, I do my worship.
And then I (whistles) step out of that compartment,
step into a different sub-personality
that's the business person, or the entrepreneur,
or the research scientist, or the investment banker.
And, I think, we just,when we can put ourselves
into these different identities,
without actually having a deeper consciousness
that takes a look at all of them,
and takes a look and says,
"hey, wait a minute,
"if this is true here, then what are you doing that there?"
I think we do that, we compartmentalize like that,
For safety.
Just emotional, psychological safety.
And laziness.
Right.
Maybe no one was there with the wisdom
to challenge us to go beyond that way of being.
Right.
So let's talk about what happens if you
are conscious enough, in your own right,
that you are going to now
raise a child in a conscious manner?
Tell us what that experience would be like,
as parent and child,
so we can have a model
for how we begin fostering this.
Because, we as a species have wandered so far away from it.
Wow.
Well, you come right to the heart
of what, I know my wife and I talk about
all the time, and it's so important to her.
But, I don't think that we can tell anyone
how to raise their child.
I think what we have to say is,
if you had a sense of connection
to the world in a deeper sense,
a connection to yourself in a deeper sense,
so that you weren't being chased by so many fears,
I don't think you would communicate
the same kind of fears to your children.
Why do people ask Kindergartners
to start learning things that they're not ready to learn?
Why do we send these children
to special schools to get a head start
on getting them into the most--
you know, this is the wealthy--
into the best private schools.
The answer has to be fear.
But it hides as a sense,
"this will give my children the best opportunity
"to succeed in the future, and success will mean
"their genes will be passed on,
"and my genes will be passed on.
"Success will mean that I can feel good about myself
"because I'm not worried about them."
It's an incredibly narcissistic choice.
I think that the true spiritual development
of a man or a woman who's going to be a parent
is a hard work,
and that no one can then say,
"here's the formula for being a good parent."
We see that people that really
have indulged their children in the last,
kind of, baby boom years,
have actually weakened them.
We see that the clean,
physically clean environments,
where children aren't crawling around in the dirt,
have actually caused them to have
weak immune systems.
We see that kids that weren't struggling
in school with conflicting levels
of social socioeconomic levels right in the schools,
and multicultural stuff, and friction,
have trouble being able to deal with conflict
when they grow up.
We don't know the right path,
but what I believe to be true,
and what I've tried to live
with my own step-children for more than 20 years.
They are now adults, but they were young
when we started.
And, what my wife has tried to live
with her children has been, our journey,
as unfolding and evolving human beings,
not ideologies about what is the best way to raise a kid.
But, the more authentic I am,
the more I'm going to respond to my child authentically.
The more authentic I am,
the more I'm going to perceive her, or his,
authenticity, and respond to it.
The more I am a product of a story
I tell myself in my head,
about the kind of man or woman I should be,
the more I'm going to look to see
if my children are becoming
the man or woman I think they should be.
Unconsciousness begets unconsciousness.
Yes, and you, in particular,
appreciate a lot of the Eastern traditions
and what they have to offer
as a means to finding ourselves,
as a means to jumping on this path
of unfolding the mind properly.
Can you get into that a little bit?
Yeah, well I was a physician.
Yes.
I don't practice medicine any more,
but when you're a physician,
yes, of course, you diagnose an illness,
but, there would be no satisfaction in that
unless there was a treatment.
Now, unfortunately, there's only limited treatments.
But there are, I mean, the mechanistic problems,
like a broken bone, we can do great things with.
Or a laceration.
Trauma.
Yes, trauma, we've developed, through the military,
ways of dealing with trauma.
But the notion of,
the reason I appreciate so much
the Eastern philosophies,
is that they're incredibly pragmatic.
You don't just learn the Buddhist teaching,
you have to sit there and practice meditation.
You have to learn to wait, without hope,
and without love, and without faith,
and without thought.
That is, literally, what the contemplative,
meditative path is about.
You can read all the Western philosophers.
I can't say I've read them all,
but I've read a good chunk of them.
There's almost nothing in any of them,
other than the example they may set for us,
and there were lives like Emmanuel Comte,
who, they were really fascinating lives,
and his ethics, his values, his morality
is as finely a stated morality as any in the world,
and I believe he tried to live that.
But the Eastern philosophies, intrinsically,
are methodologies.
Methodologies for realizing and experiencing
the states of consciousness they're talking about.
Because, until you experience it,
it's not worth anything.
Very true.
And what do you teach, when you're taking,
let's say, you focus on relationships a lot,
and relationships give us our greatest
potential for growth and our greatest pain in life.
How do you approach relationships
from limited mind, to help expand the mind?
So that people can find this
harmony and peace between them?
Well, I don't focus on relationships
in the sense of, like, a couples therapist,
or Harville Hendrix's wonderful work
with Imago, couples work.
I basically say, consciousness is a relationship.
As long as there's a contrast,
consciousness can happen.
So, the relationship I focus on
is the relationship a person has to themself
in the mirror of what's happening
between you and the significant others in your life.
So, I say, the relationship to self, to other,
is the fundamental relationship.
But that relationship depends upon
an ineffable quality that we can call
mystery, or source, or God.
So, if I have a deep relationship in myself
to that deeper level of mind,
or that deeper level of awareness,
which, ultimately, you can give it any name you want,
but the name is just a word.
That relationship I have to that source, that mystery,
is what I intend to live in my relationship
in my couple.
But what if there's conflict in my couple?
What if there's judgment?
What if there's resentment?
What if there's argument?
Then I have to ask myself the question,
and this is my work.
This is what I teach, this is the path.
What do I have to be telling myself,
or believing, about myself, about her,
or them, or it, maybe it's the government,
or maybe it's a particular religion,
maybe it's money, maybe it's my body.
What do I have to be telling myself
about myself, others, the past, and the future
to be causing this conflict right now?
To be causing this unhappiness?
What's the story behind it?
What is the story?
And I look very clearly at,
since the robot mind is built in time,
time past, time future,
and the present moment nothing can be said about,
you can't get outside of it.
You can't say anything about the now.
You can be in the now.
You can dance in the now.
You can ski in the now, make love in the now,
write poetry in the now.
But you can't talk about the now.
The now is where you are--
It's unfolding...
right now!
It's the only thing we have.
That's right.
But then we have this subject object split,
when we're about the age of
two, three, four, five, we begin to
consolidate a sense of self,
based on memory, based on imagining the future,
based on judgments and interpretations of others,
and based on judgments, stories,
interpretations of ourselves.
That basic, small ego is what's talking to us
all the time.
And it has many aspects to it.
It can have a critic inside of it,
it can have a bully inside of it,
it can have a hero inside of it,
it can have a saint, kind of, sub-personality inside of it.
That's all driving ourselves, our behavior,
in our relationships.
But in the end, our relationships are failing.
We're failing to learn as much as we can learn
about ourselves in relationships
because we're still dreaming a dream
that the relationship is supposed to fulfill us
instead of make us conscious.
So, for me, the conscious path of awakening
is lived in the context of relationships.
And you look in the mirror in those relationships,
and you struggle.
You struggle with your failings.
You struggle with your judgmentalness.
You struggle with the difference.
That's the important thing about a relationship,
is that the other, is other.
Whether the otherness is gender, you know,
because biology takes the one,
divides it in half, in order to create
another one.
Whether it's a gender difference,
which is basic.
Or, whether it's the inculturation of each gender,
which is a profound overlay that comes
streaming to us through the millenia,
limiting women and limiting men.
But if we're going to work out those kinds of things,
we're going to work them out in the now, communication,
and we're going to have to find a way
to deal with our anger, and pain, and fear,
and abandonment, judgmentalness.
And to do that we have to learn
a practice for getting really quiet
and then meeting each other again and again
from that quietness,
so that we can be resourced.
And just because you accomplish this
one time or even a hundred times,
doesn't mean the issue goes away.
As you were stating in your talk yesterday,
you can go and you can be at a conference
and you can be in your glory,
sharing your wisdom and information with people,
and you're in your groove,
go home and get in a petty argument,
as you stated, with your wife.
Yeah, exactly.
You know?
We're being pulled--
what is that part of us that's
constantly pulling us off,
and how do you quickly recover yourself from that?
Well, basically, the deeper mind
is a mind in the present, not a mind in the future.
Being able to go into the future
has survival value.
However, if you're not really anchored
in something very present and now,
the way you imagine the future
and the way you imagine where you want to go
is not necessarily going to lead you to a good place.
Give me an example of how that mind would work
when you end up in a situation
like what I was just talking about.
How do you take from the past,
run it through the now to the future,
to create scenarios that, often,
aren't even true, but the kind of pickles that,
say, you in your past have put yourself
in these situations?
What's it look like in every one of us, raw?
Well, first, before you said, "well, what do we do?"
We have to learn to stay more in the present.
Different kind of intelligence.
Then we have to learn the consequences
of what happens when I have an argument
with my wife and I say to myself,
"this is never gonna work.
"She's never gonna change.
"I'm just going to be wasting my life."
Those are the kinds of thoughts we say.
Those thoughts are about ourselves
in the present, or ourselves in the future.
Those thoughts create despair.
They create fear, anxiety, worry.
And it builds a picture,
an imaginary picture of a life of
unhappiness in the future.
Then the mind says, "what can I do
"to make myself happy?"
So then it starts to create other thoughts.
The thoughts are, "well, I'll leave her."
Or, "I just won't pay attention to her."
Or, "I'll find someone else."
Or, "that other guy was more interesting.
"I'm just noticing that woman is getting kind of..."
and we start to look outside to the next relationship
that we imagine will complete us.
That's what we do.
We leave the now into a provisional,
imaginary, hypothetical world,
created in our minds,
and it's a future world, that's going
to make us happy.
Just like we leave the now, because
we're in conflict, we're in pain,
we don't feel seen, we don't feel understood,
we feel judged, we are being judgmental.
It always works both ways.
And then we're having a hypothetical
and imaginary future, in which
we're going to be forever unhappy and dissatisfied,
and so we have to do something about that.
And we actually believe those words
that we are creating in our heads.
And if we would stop, and wait without thought,
because we're not ready for thought,
we're not ready for a thought about the future.
Particularly when we're in the middle
of an emotional reaction or response.
Particularly, exactly.
Whenever we are muddy, with an emotional reaction,
we will not think properly.
We cannot think properly.
Our thinking will simply be a reaction
to the emotion,
and the thinking will create a new emotion.
So the thinking that creates hope for the future,
when I meet the right guy,
or get the right job, or have more money,
or finally get the house we need,
or downsize to something more--
whatever that thinking is.
And now, I can hear someone, about their thinking,
"but how do you solve problems?
"Don't you have to solve problems?"
Yes, you have to solve problems,
but where are you going to start from?
If you're going to navigate your life,
are you going to start from an imaginary future
where you think your problem will be solved?
Or are you going to start from the present moment,
and stop reacting to what you're feeling
and get quiet enough to realize
how the real issue isn't what I thought it was.
The real issue is my judgments of my wife,
or my judgments of myself,
or my judgments of my job.
And I try to tell people over and over again.
Don't change your job,
don't change your career,
until you're so connected to yourself,
and then you won't have to change.
The world will come to you
and offer you a new job.
Happens every day.
It does.
Let's talk about baby steps.
Baby steps in getting there.
Okay, you have the presence
to stop yourself in the moment,
in the middle of something
that you find uncomfortable,
that you're reacting to emotionally.
You say, "okay, I'm supposed to stop now.
"Richard said I'm supposed to stop."
Tell us what happens from there.
Well, first of all, this is,
in my most recent book, the Mandala of Being,
I literally lay out what we do,
and how we can stop--
Yes, and I was in--
So, the first thing you need to know
is when you leave, there's only four places you will go.
The future, the past, stories about yourself,
stories about others.
When you recognize you're doing that,
that immediately helps you come back.
Baby steps.
Have a compass in your hand that says,
now I'm too far in the future,
and you start again in the present.
That's one baby step.
Baby step, learn to stay in your body.
Tune in, get into your body,
recognize whether it's tense,
relax tension,
because, as soon as you relax the body,
you start to calm the mind.
All of the Eastern traditions, Eastern philosophies,
which are really practices,
as we mentioned a little while ago,
are actually based on working through the body
to quiet the mind.
Or, working through mantra,
which are specific mental constructions, or sounds,
to absorb the mind, distract the mind,
to stop it from its constant fabrication
of imaginary--
Its loops, yeah.
Well, it's, they're always imaginary.
We're imagining what we want,
or we're imagining what we don't want,
instead of living right where we are.
The present is never vivid.
When the present is vivid,
the nature of the vivid present
is an intrinsic sense of joy,
and intrinsic sense of well-being,
and so we're not going to make the same choices.
But, in terms of baby steps,
I have a free course on my website,
which is a five week course.
It's completely free.
And it literally teaches how to come back to the present.
How to recognize the way the mind tricks you
into the future or the past, and so forth.
How the mind will take you away
from something difficult,
it's trying to protect you,
but if you don't stay consciously present,
waiting, without hope, in a difficult feeling,
you'll never grow faith in your true self.
You'll constantly be running away.
And I think that's the story of
our six and a half billion people,
and the 10 or 20 billion that lived before us.
The story of humanity is not so much
what we've imagined into life,
but what we ran away from,
in order to imagine so much of
our accomplishments into life.
People, a humanity that has faced
deep and essential and fundamental fears,
in a now moment process
of waiting and being present,
is a free humanity that can build a world
that is much more compassionate, fair,
a celebration of the wholeness
that we each are, and that this world is,
but which we cannot see,
until we get quiet.
Because you have gotten quiet
and sustained it for long periods of time,
explain to us what it feels like
and what the experience of
standing in the middle of the experience
of true mind,
and going through a day,
going through life,
going through situations.
Well, first of all,
it's an amazing experience of the body,
as if the body were solid,
but you could breathe through it.
And there's a sense of, a kind of current.
Something that's welling up
from, I don't know where,
that gives a very gentle sense of bliss.
Not, kind of, an ecstatic state
that you might achieve through a chemical,
or after some really great downhill ski run,
or something like that.
Or because you just won the lottery.
This is a very soft, incredibly nourishing thing
that I experience all the time.
And, of course, the light, then I perceive.
My perceptions become so alive,
the light is almost scintillating,
and the colors are very bright.
And I feel like, there's a communication.
I'm being breathed by this world
that I'm looking at,
and it's breathing me, and I'm breathing it.
In fact, that experience of, I'm not being breathed,
I'm not breathing, it's not Richard who breathes,
or even Richard's body that breathes,
it's almost that Richard's body is breathed
by something more.
And, in that place, I am able
to look with a great deal of clarity,
and not judgment, at what my mind has done
to create stress or unhappiness,
and the stress melts away pretty quickly.
Then I can start all over again.
It's like, somebody's just taken that plastic--
you know, that children's thing,
where you can write on it,
and you see it, and then you pull up the plastic sheet,
and it all gets erased?
Yeah, like refreshing the page on the computer.
Something like that, except--
The refresh button.
Except it just come back
to a basic sense of gratitude
and, I mean, all of my work,
all of my teaching, starts from this place.
Because then I look at the world,
and I look at the suffering I've created in myself,
and I know that I create suffering
in the exact way everybody does,
so I understand how everyone creates their suffering,
which gives me a sense of compassion,
but it gives me a desire to go out
and help people do something
to stop that suffering,
because I know how to stop it in myself,
and have made some progress,
so now I can help others.
And I want to.
It's not a question of, oh, it's my mission.
It's so innate.
You cannot help but want to show someone else
the richness of life.
If you've had a taste of the richness of life,
and it's a richness that's really
very much independent of circumstances.
To a certain degree.
I mean, I have to go out and do
the same things everyone else does.
Get food, repair things in the house,
earn a living, and that means plan the future.
It means making commitments to things
that may not take place for another,
in my case, I often have a schedule
that's two years ahead of me.
But what I know about that
is that, I'm going to arrive,
two years from now, if I'm alive,
in the now.
And it's not going to be any different
than this now.
I may be with you, and I haven't been with you before.
But I'm with you from that place
inside of me that is timeless.
And from that place of listening,
or essence, that has no beginning and no end,
and is not nameable, which is the real core of all of us.
And then we start a relationship.
And the relationship can be immensely satisfying.
And the amazing thing is,
you can be surprised and immensely satisfied
in a relationship that has an enormous history,
including a history of hurt.
Because it's a past hurt.
And if you give a relationship a chance
to be reborn in the now,
with all of its history,
that relationship is what has a mature love in it,
not a new, wonderfully- delicious
infatuational kind of romantic love,
but a mature love.
Mature love is a very different feeling
than romantic love.
That begs the question,
because you have been influenced
by Eastern traditions--
You might want to
say this, I've been influenced by Eastern traditions
after I woke up.
After you woke up, okay.
I did not study them at all.
When I had the experience of landing
in the now of myself, unified in my being,
religious experience, mystical experience,
and then I became fascinated by
the Eastern traditions in particular,
because they're so pragmatic.
Okay.
And from that perspective, then,
and having experienced this, and, I'm sure,
you've been in many different cultures,
do you notice a difference in
the maturity level of relationships
in areas of the world in which
these practices are held dear and adhered to,
versus the Western world, the United States,
you know, we're here right now.
Do you notice a difference?
I haven't taught in Asia,
so I can't say I've been in Asian cultures.
I've certainly met many people
who have been students of Buddhism,
and various Hindu practices.
And, you know, if you find a good teacher,
and you let that teacher influence your life,
a true teacher's going to teach you
how to come into the now of yourself.
I think we make a lot of mistakes
with Eastern traditions that are about enlightenment,
because we don't understand,
enlightenment is always in a context.
So I'm only as enlightened, as I am
in that specific context,
and if that happens to be when you're
listening to your 16 year old who doesn't want to study
and is smoking too much pot,
you'll find out how enlightened you are.
Or if the context is, you go home
and you visit your parents,
as Ramdas said years ago,
you want to find out how enlightened you are?
Go home and visit your parents.
Enlightenment is always in a context.
So, then what I would say is,
consider yourself only as enlightened
as you are in the context that brings out the worst in you.
That's your level of enlightenment.
Not in the context that brings out the best in you.
Well, on that note, that's perfectly said,
and that's wonderful that you offer
this course on getting centered in this way,
free to the public.
I very much appreciate that kind of work.
And you have other resources
people can dip into, as well,
and I know you've got to catch a plane in a minute,
and I thank you very much for your time.
My privilege.
This is what my life is about.
And thank you for why you're doing this.
Just to serve consciousness.
You can go to Richard's website
by clicking on the link below
to get information regarding his lecture schedule.
In addition, he's the author of six books,
which you can also purchase
by clicking below.
Meanwhile, if you enjoyed this interview,
you might also enjoy our talk with Byron Katie,
Robert Tennyson Stevens, and John Demartini.
Until next time, thanks for watching CMN.
(soothing music)